This is the world in words I'm you know. So back in
2011 people started posting these videos on YouTube
where they would read a list of words and then answer specific questions to
test their accent.
Hi everybody we want to do this for you for quite some time you know just
because lots of people comment on my my love list Bush accent and the SO
when I saw that type of a cornet I thought of
these are the words and I'm not going in and say it for you so I'm just going to say them say
them you know it was on watch.
Sound work sound works from PR right.
The world in words is made possible in part by a major grant from the National Endowment for the
Humanities.
Exploring the human endeavor the axent tag video blew up as a
meme. It's called an ax attack because usually at the end of each video the blogger
challenges or tags a friend or another YouTube subscriber
to take the accent quiz and then it goes on and on. Tag you're it. Well
today there are more than 400000 of these videos and they're not just
Americans. It has gone viral around the world. Writer Devin Ethan trace the origin of the
accent tag me and she wrote about it for the online language Journal
fire. You should really check out surefire if you're interested in language at all. It's great and
it's a relatively new journal up to link to it on our Facebook page. So
watched hundreds of these acts and videos in the course of all of her reporting
and what you noticed was it wasn't just people simply taking a quiz.
It was actually more of a performance.
What this performance is supposed to do is make a comment on the kind of English that
they speak the kind of regional English or the dialect that they speak. And it really is kind of this
fun proud performance of the different ways that people speak English. Linguists are
very impressed by this because most people who haven't studied
linguistics have what's called a prescriptivist that's a linguist say at a
prescriptivist view of the proper way to speak a language
and they learn that in school and they learn that from all kinds of social pressure and there are
dialects in this country in any country really that are stigmatized and others
that are held up to be the models.
And so when people say that they're going to speak their dialect on a YouTube
video that that's kind of unusual because they're not being prescriptive as they're being what language called
descriptivist which is what linguists are to linguists nothing's right and nothing's wrong.
So it's pretty impressive to see a lot of people just sort of being proud of the way they
talk.
I'm from New Zealand so might I say it's a little bit different but. Well I think it is I
don't know what you guys think of course.
Do you know that I haven't actually.
Can you text because I like to think of the Finnish accent
as it's almost like the Russian accents
like flat depressed suicidal cousin.
This morning I decided not to actually type video. I wasn't talked but
you know then I have to take me as far as I'm concerned. I mean it.
And you actually went back and traced this meum and these questions because a
lot of people when you see the videos they they're saying the exact same list of words corpus of words
and then they have a specific list of questions. And you trace those
questions and what did you find when you dug into that.
Yeah I found out that doing with six professor who back in the 90s was at
Harvard wanted to teach his students about the different
class and regional and ethnic dialects in the United States. He wanted to
use the students themselves as models for that because he really couldn't find any material
available that was not a million years old and was old white farmers from way back.
So but then he was discouraged because by the time a student no matter
what isolated place their community they're from if they can get to Harvard. Really
really quickly they change their speech their speech becomes standard. So he
realize though that there's a lot of stuff even if that happens to you if you end up in an elite place like
Harvard there is a lot of vocabulary a lot of ways of pronouncing words that you just don't
change. And there was vocabulary that you pick up in different parts of the country and
it never you know really occurs to you consciously or unconsciously to to change the vocabulary
so he came up with a really long list of words to pronounce and questions
to answer. Then he put that list as a survey
on a Harvard Web site in 2002 and he was amazed that in the next
two years 60000 people took the survey.
This is just phenomenal there's never been a linguistic survey that that many people participated in
where they post videos to him or how how are they just taking it writing
down their answers to the questions and that sort of thing at the time it was a multiple
choice.
It was just do you say C A R A L
with two syllables or with three syllables. And then you could
just check it off. Right. So you know. Carmel or caramel.
Exactly and I'm not I'm spelling the word for you. Although people got to see that word but you know
I'm just going to spell it for you. How do you say it. How do you say I say I say Carmel
Carmel. Yeah I think that's a southern thing. I'm not sure my mom was from Pittsburgh
but. You graduated in Euston So maybe there's a belt you know. I
don't really know maybe there is a line that got Arnold out of the Carmel caramel but
there probably is. Oh what was another one like that. OK our
roof. I also say Roof. My husband who's from Wisconsin says
if that was me got me exactly rough it's not rough it's more like
rough earth. So that's what that's what that list
evoked and what happened was so then another linguist put it on
his website in 2004 then about a year later.
Social media was born on the Internet and people
started putting stuff up on social media again. I mean there weren't any any videos
at that time people were just putting up these sort of checklist results. I just kind of
remained that way sort of checklists and sort of like filling in little circles you know or checking
off things and then discussing with people what your results were because the idea was that you could
tell where you were from. You know there'd be the single if you said these things like this then you're from
eastern Louisiana you know you're from Minnesota. And
then in 2011 all of a sudden some people started
reading the list and you know filming themselves and putting these videos
on YouTube. And that's when it really took off. Wow the power of YouTube.
Yes and it just became a performance I noticed that what
young women will often dress up when they do it. You know they'll be kind of having you know I mean it's a
performance they put on make up they were sort of nice clothes. Some of them will lie on a bad
to it if you know I have to say that I've watched a bunch of the.
And I think actually you sent me one of these.
The woman who is knitting while she's doing it you just
cracked me up so much.
It's like sort of a lens into a whole other world. I felt watching
a bunch of these different tagged videos.
My favorite ones are where you have a couple you know you have a couple who's clearly
romantically involved and it's like a date. And there's a lot of joking
going on and just a lot of good natured teasing. It's very very sweet
when two people have two different dialects and they get together and do it.
So this phenomenon hasn't just stayed in the United States it's kind of gone
global with the same. What I find interesting about it is the same corpus of
words in the same set of questions and they've gone global.
You see this really strange kind of mismatch between.
People who you know didn't grow up in the United States know some of them many of them are native
speakers but they're from places like Australia or Scotland or the Caribbean.
And you know English speaking countries in Africa likely be area. So there are a
lot of elements of U.S. culture that are on that list that just don't compute for
them. For example the stumps people is the
question What is it called when you throw toilet paper on a house.
So you know people are doing pretty good when they're just trying to pronounce Manet's or
through caramel but you know when they get to this question about the toilet paper now you
know most Americans they remember they remember putting toilet paper on a house right
I always called it wrapping a house to go rent a house tonight let's have slumber party go
rent a house out of that tea peeing that's what I would you know.
Let's go t peeing.
Well these English speakers in other parts of the world don't have a clue.
I mean my entire life I've never had any foreign
countries. Not at all. So it's probably
obvious that I have a Chinese section and here comes the question
What is it called.
Well throw toilet paper. On the. House
that way. How do I try both in the house just really
gross. I so I have no idea what this question is about. So I
talked to her on the house.
I mean it does actually put. A fine lens on the act
of throwing a perfectly good toilet paper on somebody's house for a prank
is extremely wasteful and is also such a strange
cultural phenomenon as well.
It does make you think about what do we do why do we do that.
Yeah it's like definitely cultural interchange here. You know hearing other people from other
countries hearing their accent tags. Why do you think this went so viral. I think it went
really viral because people love to think about how they
speak. It's just you know it's a constant I think it's almost universal
cross-culturally people like to. Think about how they speak. Talk about
how they speak. Generally people make judgments about how other people
speak. And of course you know you speak so beautifully you sound so cultured.
Or that's just street talk that's like jargon that trash talk
that shows you're not educated and that's the way we're brought up you know in our grammar books I
remember when I was little there was something about you know never say he learned to
me. I remember things in my grammar books in seventh grade
that my mom used and I was told this is wrong so that's called prescriptivism in
linguistics and people are brought up you know prescriptively in the popular culture about their
language. And you know so people are very at
the same. On the one hand insecure about their dialect and especially if
they come from marginalised regions or races or ethnic groups or classes and on the other
hand they're proud of how they talk especially these people who do the YouTube
videos they're proud and that's unusual.
I have watched I don't know I would say more than a dozen of them and they're saying the
same words and answering the same questions but they're highly entertaining to
watch. Even though it's the same thing over and over again but just seeing how people
react to the specific words. And if the scene had people from different cultures
react to the specific words there is something quite fascinating about it. It's
like watching the same play you know done.
A million different times is a really good actor. Everybody's got their own style
and I think the other thing that that you realize that you really get on a gut
level when you hear these and it doesn't really matter what country it is. Is that a
lot of these accidents never end up in the media in the mass media. We don't get to
hear them very much which I think is a shame. You know I think there are all kinds of
judgments made in the mass media about what gets on the air what gets on the radio and what
doesn't. And so it's really great to hear these accents I mean I've heard accents on
those YouTube videos that I've never heard. I have just never heard them. And it's
just wonderful I mean it's delicious to hear people speaking in cut and places of
the United States or the world right where you maybe you know the school the
language that you learned in school you know whether it's your native language or your foreign
language. But you've never heard people speak that way.
It's true. One of my favorites and I'll just end with this but is the Jamaican video and I think I send this
to you and the girl. First of all she's very funny but she's like.
Now listen I'm just I mean. I live in Jamaica. Jimmy this is
my accent.
I live in Jamaica.
This I mean you know some people say that to me
but they're not from demigod like their parents are from Jamaica. So they to me.
That's not me. I am from here. I was born here. I've never been
outside of Jamaica for a period longer than for a week.
I live here you know and the accent that I have would
be a Jamaican accent because I mean to me. This is my accent.
Jimi accent.
U.S. U.S. U.S. apparently she got a lot of comments like You don't sound Jamaican but she
keeps pointing to the room. This is Jamaica. I am Jamaican.
This is the way I speak.
And it was really nice and I think what I got out of
that was that there are stereotypes about how people speak how people with
certain dialect speak their received stereotypes. And that's not really the
way they speak necessarily. You know there's all kinds of right even in a
dialect depending on people's educational level depending on you know who else they hang
out with. So it's really great to hear somebody like her say
I am Jamaican. This is how I speak. Take it or leave
it guys.
So final question have you done one of these acts and tag videos.
I know I know I'm too old. What do you mean you're too
old.
I think you have to be. I mean I've never seen one that has anybody over the age of about
25. It's a youth culture deal.
Maybe you need to start the viral like I don't know how old the senior citizens accents
act senior citizens from Houston at AX a tag a phenomena
right. Yes. OK take that under advisement.
Writer Debbie Nathan on the origins of accent tagging and I'm going to post a
link to her article she wrote a really interesting detail article about
these origins on the language journaled Shaw fire.
I'll link to that on the Facebook page the world Mort's Facebook page. Thanks so much Debbie I really
appreciate it. It was great thank you.
Bird is his name. Yeah how are you.
Are you good if you just would in a complete sentence introduce yourself.
I am bird Vox. I am a professor at the University of Cambridge in England
and I developed a dialect survey that was the
origin of the You Tube accent main About 15 years ago.
Your last name is spelled v a you X but it's really pronounced Fox.
Yep neurons of hawks in my dialect that is amazing and in radio
parlance we always use the vox pop.
Yeah I can already tell where you're from roughly Nina by your pronunciation of that
phrase really.
Yeah that was going to be the last part I was going to test you and I was going to do your very own I mean
it's not quite the tester that you created but a variant of it.
Well first I'm going to hold off. It's probably pretty apparent where I'm from. But
when your quiz was put online it were you a bit surprised that was as
popular as it was.
I had hoped that that many people would catch on because I was convinced that
the questions were really interesting they had always compelled me
growing up. And one reason for it. Thinking that was there was a one question survey
designed by Alan McConnachie at Cal Tech. That was just for a Coke and soda
and hundreds of thousands of people had taken that one question survey. And
so there was some evidence that people were willing to take that kind of thing.
Growing up you said you were interested in these kinds of questions What things did you notice growing up about the
way different American spoke that made you curious.
It was a product of growing up in Houston Texas with a dad who is from
New York and a mother who is from Indiana and then moving to Chicago when I was
nine. So for example I noticed that I always like to use you
all to address a group of people. And I noticed when we moved to Chicago that you
guys was what they used. And when we moved. Say England when I was 13.
I was made fun of for those and they used you lot instead.
And I remember being confused when we moved to Chicago that they
said Pop where I was used to saying Coke. You know when you're a little kid you don't
realize that it's strange to call all carbonated beverages coke. It's
just what you say and moving around made me start thinking about these things and having a
mother who said lawyer instead of lawyer got me interested in that kind of
variation that distinguishes the middle and southern parts of
Indiana from what you would hear in Chicago in the northern cities.
Well so essentially moving around as a kid and being the product of so many different places
you parenting from different places but you're on the path to becoming a linguist.
Yeah definitely and also living in Germany when I was three and
being around Spanish in Texas has got me really interested in how languages can
differ.
Has anything surprising come out of these videos that you as a linguist didn't expect or
has made you reconsider certain issues or certain things about pronunciation of
products.
I've been shocked at how many people who aren't native speakers of
English been willing to do the accent tag.
And I'm always interested in what non-native speakers will pick
for a word choice in terms of whether those they're British in origin or American in
origin and where exactly in the US or Britain they come from.
It is incredible that this medium has spread globally that
has lots to say both about English in the world and maybe about YouTube in the world.
But what it also points to me is just how culturally specific the
questions that you had.
Yes good point. I designed the questions originally for the United States in
particular. I have a new set of questions as designed and for
English speakers around the world. So there you have things more like what do you call the break
you use in a car with manual transmission. You know what that's called
like a hand brake. Yeah. So hand brake parking brake e-brake
they are speakers of English across the whole world will have a term. Interestingly though
there are a few phrases that show up across the world regardless of
native language like some of my Chinese students today were telling me
that they often hear oh my God used inside Chinese
conversations.
Wow. What's been the most surprising thing to come out of this mean for
you personally.
For me it's mainly a psychological effect it's very bizarre to
hear hundreds of thousands of random people across the globe
answering questions that I came up with when I was in my 20s that were based
on my college friends making fun of me for what I call things or
based on weird things my mother or my dad said to me their sort of private things from my
past. And now they've gone across the entire world which is a little
bit disturbing but I guess nice have you done one
yourself. No I'm a little bit afraid of what people would
make of me because I have an idiosyncratic accent. Which
is partly from growing up in Houston and Chicago and then Boston and
then England and partly from being an academic so it's sort of
nerdy. And then it's partly sort of autistic and monotonous which
there are features that are independent of particular regions. So I'm not sure if
people would know what to make of my accent other than to be disturbed by it.
But that's the whole point of the accent had video or it seems like one of the points is to declare
loudly is the way I speak.
And I'm proud of it. Yeah that's a good feature of it isn't it. I
would like to do it and then give my linguistic comments on each of the
answers so that people could see that the whole thing is. Not just a joke
and it's not just a popular fad that actually has some intellectual content
to it that interested people maybe one of these days I'll get around to it.
I hereby tag you and you need to do that yeah No one's ever attacked me you know.
Do you mind if I take the test. Will you go. How do you analyze my accent.
First of all I would like to preface this with the fact that I don't think I have an accent. Ha.
OK so here are the words Aunt roof route.
Wash oil theater iron salmon Carmel fire
water. Sure data ruin crayon. New Orleans.
Pekin AP can. I don't know that one's hard. Both Again
probably spitting image. Alabama lawyer
coupon Menezes sirup pajamas cops
naturally aluminum and follow up and the questions are What
is it called when you throw toilet paper onto a house what's called T peeing in.
Where I'm from. What is the bug that when you touch it curls into a
ball the rollie pollie. What is the bubbly carbonated
drink called soda. What do you call gym shoes. Probably
tennis shoes sometimes sneakers. It really would depend around who I
was around. What do you say to address a group of people. Probably
you guys. What do you call the kind of spider or spider like creature that has an oval
shaped body and extremely long legs Daddy Long Legs. What do you call your
grandparents. Well I called my paternal grandparents Nana and
pop up. I only had a maternal grandma and I called her grandma.
What do you call the wheeled contraption in which you carry groceries at the supermarket. A shopping
cart. What do you call it when rain falls while the sun is shining. This one I
like but I learned this later in life. A Monkey's wedding. That's what I like.
What is the thing that you change the TV channel with a remote control and the last
one I have a question was What else would you call it besides a room a collector maybe.
You know there are a few terms I didn't actually come up with that question and the one thing in
the accent tag that I didn't come up with. OK so how did I do
that you largely had the responses that most Americans
give you have a few things that would help localize you to the
western half of the country. Yet when you pronounced VEO X
for a voice box. Yeah that shows what we call the cot caught
merger which merged in the particular way you pronounced it is
characteristic of the western half of the US. You also had
Carmel do I remember correctly at our inner 0 instead of caramel. Yeah.
So that again would mark you as being from the western half of the country in all
likelihood And what about a road that you go fast on the freeway
already you're starting to seem like you're from the West
Coast in particular.
You might not be able to like actually listen to people often because you're hearing all these different.
That's exactly right. Well by the way you said monkey's wedding accident
tag that is primarily found in South Africa
and Zimbabwe in English. Really. So you must have picked it up from
someone from one of those two places I'm guessing.
Yeah that's that's funny I might have. Yeah I might have. I have a colleague who also spent time
in South Africa and I think she said that once and I picked that up from her. I had never
had a term for that before and I thought oh cool. Now I have a new term.
That's one of the coolest phrases in the world as a whole actually so
in the south of the U.S. there are a lot of people who have variants of the Devils beating his wife like
the devil's beating his wife behind the back door or the devil's beating his wife with a
codfish. And you also find that same expression in parts of
France and in parts of Syria you find Fox's wedding in Japan
and parts of Wales and the list goes on and on it's normally some kind of wedding
or some kind of giving birth. Kind of unexpected animal or human
like a widow or a witch.
Well so your then diagnosis is that I'm from the west.
Yes and you know if I give any terms that would localize you more than the
west coast I can ask you a few more things. Sure it might help. So one that is
very good for outing people from Oregon is what does the word
Spend be mean.
Oh I have no idea. And Oregon that means expensive. Oh really.
That's very cute.
And so within California the main ones I
tend to rely on with regular people are what you call the
freeways like the 405 and the 5 and so on. You know about that
yeah.
Yesterday you say well I would say PCH and I would say the
405.
OK so that would mark you as being from the southern half of California I would
guess.
Corr ect.
Yeah I get in trouble a lot or I've gotten lots of weird looks
because I currently live in Boston for saying the 90. Yeah everybody's
like what is the 90 It's the pattern or the pike. Oh yeah.
I've got a lot of funny looks sometimes for that. Well Bert Fox thank
you so much for giving me the accent quiz. It's not often that one
gets to meet the person who sparks something that goes viral.
Well it definitely helps me feel better about my relations with my classmates from
college from when they made fun of me for saying gym shoes instead of
sneakers and Coke instead of pop and soda. Thanks
Nina. And you are right that you don't have all that many
West Coast features left anymore.
Yeah it's sad that's what happens after living for 10 years on the east coast sort of
wipes it all out.
But you know what about when you turn your car around
on the road to go the opposite direction and you do it very suddenly What would you call that.
Like a sudden U-turn. Yeah.
More colloquially than that flip a bitch. That's what I think
is that happened. That's it. Is that it. Yeah that's the
California term.
Oh OK. Oh I feel so I am part of it.
Part of the place.
I have another one for you like that. The middle seat on a car what do you call it.
Oh you call that the bitch too.
Yeah.
So that's mainly in California that's not everywhere not everybody thinks of that as like I don't
have such a bad term.
Do you always feel a little naughty saying it. Well Bert
thanks so much I really appreciate your time.
You know that's for calling me in a nice chatting with you.
Linguist Bert Fox. Yes folks it doesn't get better than that.
His original dialect survey sparked the accent tag mean that went
viral around the world. Do you have a few minutes to burn. I
strongly suggest you go to youtube and just type in accent tag.
Watch a couple videos they're pretty addicting. And then maybe do the quiz yourself.
Consider yourself attacked and that's all for today. Keep sending me your Adam a
logical questions but nagging questions you have about the origins of a certain word
writer and linguist Erika Grant has graciously said she would answer all of your
etymological questions. So keep sending them in. We're collecting a bunch now so we can do
a bigger pod cast about that soon. Message me at the world inwards Facebook page or
you can even call 6 1 7 9 0 3 8 8 1 8 6 1 7
9 0 3 8 8 8 1 8. I'm you know I'm on Twitter
at POR Zuki but the P O R U C K I.
Thanks for listening. Be back soon.
What is it called when you first try to find one of us. When you want to
deny. Yourself for joy you know. Corny I
know. Yes I can. That's.
The same. Right sound work sound work for NPR.
The world in words is made possible in part by a major grant from the National Endowment for the
Humanities. Exploring the human endeavor.